ReminderNotes.md, before:

Useful resources

- BJRM 'What I Tell My Patients About...' - http://www.bjrm.co.uk/patient-information.aspx

Next find measures, treatments, symptoms and consequences for the following conditions (esp as they relate to CVD):

- Adynamic Bone Disease
- Arteriosclerosis
- Calciphylaxis
- Extraskeletal Calcification
- Hyperparathyroid Bone Disease
- Hyperparathyroidism (Secondary)
    - Secondary hyperparathyroidism refers to the excessive secretion of parathyroid hormone by the parathyroid glands in response to hypocalcemia (low blood calcium levels) and associated hyperplasia of the glands.
- Hyperphosphatemia
- Hypocalcemia
- Hypovitaminosis D
- Metastatic Calcification
- Osteomalacia
- Renal Osteodystrophy

Find information about the following measures:

- Calcium (plasma, serum, ionised serum level, etc.)
- Parathyroid Hormone (serum)
- Vitamin D (serum)
    - If calcitrol level only is measured, rather than both it and calcidiol, then you're really only measuring calcitrol level without any idea of how much calcidiol you're body is producing
        - Realy want vitamin D level (calcidiol) and activated (calcitrol)
- (Inorganic) phosphate/phosphorus (blood, plasma, serum, etc.)

Find information about the following treatments:

- Calcimimetrics
- Calcium Supplement
- Dialysis
- Parathyroidectomy
- Phosphate Binders
- Renal Transplant
- Vitamin D Replacement Therapy



Bone Stuff
http://www.kdigo.org/ControConf/CKD-MBD%202013/Presentations/CKD-MBD%20and%20Osteoporosis%20-%20S.%20Ott.pdf
http://www.bjrm.co.uk/ShowPDF.aspx?index=0&st=14&nd=17&edit=105&aid=820
I believe that hyperparathyroid bone disease is essentially high turnover or high formation bone disease as the high PTH level increases osteoclast and osteoblast activity
Adynamic usualy results as a consequence of taking medications to treat hyperparathyroid bone disease
- Bone Pain
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)
- Bone Fracture
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)
- Bone Deformation
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)
- Joint Pain
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)


Likely Relevant Correlates:

- Alport Syndrome
- Diabetes
    - Causes CKD
- Hypertension
    - Causes CKD
- Haemolytic Uraemic Syndrome
- Nephrosclerosis
    - Hypertensive Nephrosclerosis
- Nephritis
    - Chronic/Acute Interstitial Nephritis
    - Glomerulonephritis
        - Infection related chronic Glomerulonephritis is a major cause of CKD in sub-Saharan Africa (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272638607015995)
- Anemia
    - CKD causes this
- Renovascular Disease
    - Atherosclerotic Renovascular Disease
- Pericarditis
    - CKD causes this
- Cardiovascular Disease
    - CKD causes this
    - Heart attack, stroke or Cerebrovascular Accident, (congestive) heart failure, ischemic heart disease, COPD (is this CVD?), Peripheral Arterial Disease, Peripheral vascular diseases, Transient Ischaemic Attack, coronary heart disease ("Coronary Artery Disease", "Ischemic Heart Disease"), etc. etc.
    - Risk factors for CVD like: smoking status; lipid management; proteinuria; anaemia; glycated haemoglobin and microalbuminuria in people with diabetes; serum cholesterol and total cholesterol: HDL ratio; BMI, alcohol consumption; urinalysis and total protein creatinine ratio; haemoglobin concentration




Other Correlates - No literature checks have been performed to see how these hold up as real causes

- inflammation
- Diabetic Retinopathy
- Hematuria
- Hyperglycemia
- Hyperkalemia
- Iron Deficiency
- Folate (B12) Deficiency
- Impaired Glucose Tolerance
- Family History of Kidney Disease Including Polycystic Kidneys
- Systemic Lupus Erythematosis
- Relative Erythropoietin Deficiency
- Rheumatoid Arthritis
- Protein in the urine
    - Proteinuria, Microalbuminuria, etc.
- Angina - chest pain due to restricted blood flow
- Balkan (endemic) Nephropathy (ReadV2 K0B6.)
- Urological factors that may reduce eGFR
    - UTIs?
    - Kidney Stones
    - obstruction/lower urinary tract symptoms (from published QICKD protocol)
    - prostate disease (from published QICKD protocol)
    - result of longstanding blockage to the urinary system (such as enlarged prostate or kidney stones)
- Infections (CKD as risk multiplier for infectious diseases leading to greater prevalence)
    - Pneumonia
    - Sepsis
    - Pulmonary infections
- Dehydration
- Cancer
    - Kidney cancers…
- Tubular atrophy

Treatments

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
    - ACE inhibitors cause relaxation of blood vessels, as well as a decreased blood volume, which leads to lower blood pressure and decreased oxygen demand from the heart. They inhibit the angiotensin-converting enzyme, an important component of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system.
    - Treats
        - Hypertension - Ref: CKD Medscape CME Expert Column Series: Issue 3 — Management of Chronic Kidney Disease Comorbidities)
        - Congestive Heart Failure
- Anti-hypertensives (some codes in the QICKD concepts “Anti hypertensive Drugs Horich”, “Diuretics Drugs Horich”, “Anti hypertensive Drugs”, “Diuretics Drugs”)
    - Alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
    - Beta-adrenoceptor blockers
    - Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
    - Vasodilators
    - Diuretics
        - Thiazide, loop, potassium sparing, potassium sparing compound
- drugs/therapy that affect renal function (e.g. NSAIDs)
- Calcium channel blocker
- Erythropoietin Stimulating Agents
- Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
    - Aspirin
- Insulin
- Lipid lowering drugs
- T2DM - Meglitinides (glinides), thiazolidinediones (glitazones), sulphonylureas (sulfonylureas), Metformin, Alpha Glucosidase Inhibitors, Amylin Analogs, Biguanides, DPP-4 Inhibitors, Incretin Mimetics, etc.
- Anticoagulants, antiplatelets, etc.
    - Persantin, Warfarin, Clopidogrel, etc.
- Iron Therapy
- Insulin (Insulin Preparations)

Measurements (for CKD, its causes and probably any effects it has)

- CKD
    - Creatinine (serum, etc.)
        - Can be affected by creatinine generation (muscle mass and diet), tubular secretion and extrarenal removal
    - eGFR and Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
    - Albumin in the urine, urine microalbumin, ACR, (micro)ACR, (micro)albumin excretion rate, serum albumin
        - albuminuria
    - Protein in the urine, PCR, urine protein excretion, serum total protein
        - Protienuria
- Other
    - Blood Pressure
    - Glucose (blood, serum, fasting, level, etc.)
    - Haemoglobin (estimated, A1, A1c, level, etc.)
        - The A1 measures are probably HbA1c
    - Fructosamine (serum, etc.)
    - Cholesterol (blood, serum, fasting, total, etc.)
    - Triglycerides (serum, etc.)
    - Aldosterone
    - Folate (B12)
    - Bicarbonate (serum, etc.)
    - C reactive Protein (serum, etc.)
    - Framingham QRISK cardiovascular
    - Uric Acid

Personal, Demographic and Socioeconomic

- Age
- Height
- weight and BMI (obesity)
- alcohol consumption
- Smoking status
- Exercise level
- Ethnicity
- Deprivation index ??
- etc.


# References To Check

infectious diseases continue to be prevalent in low-income countries, secondary to poor sanitation, inadequate supply of safe water, and high concentrations of disease-transmitting vectors (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1548559510000388)

Environmental pollution, pesticides, analgesic abuse, herbal medications, and use of unregulated food additives also contribute to the burden of chronic kidney disease in developing countries (End-Stage Renal Care in Developing Countries: The India Experience)

Genetic factors also contribute. Variations in MYH9 and APOL1 are associated with non-diabetic chronic kidney disease in individuals of African origin (MYH9 is associated with nondiabetic end-stage renal disease in African Americans) (Genetic variation in APOL1 associates with younger age at hemodialysis initiation)

Commit message:

Added some notes on CKD

ReminderNotes.md, after:

Useful resources

- BJRM 'What I Tell My Patients About...' - http://www.bjrm.co.uk/patient-information.aspx

Next find measures, treatments, symptoms and consequences for the following conditions (esp as they relate to CVD):

- Adynamic Bone Disease
- Arteriosclerosis
- Calciphylaxis
- Extraskeletal Calcification
- Hyperparathyroid Bone Disease
- Hyperparathyroidism (Secondary)
    - Secondary hyperparathyroidism refers to the excessive secretion of parathyroid hormone by the parathyroid glands in response to hypocalcemia (low blood calcium levels) and associated hyperplasia of the glands.
- Hyperphosphatemia
- Hypocalcemia
- Hypovitaminosis D
- Metastatic Calcification
- Osteomalacia
- Renal Osteodystrophy

Find information about the following measures:

- Calcium (plasma, serum, ionised serum level, etc.)
- Parathyroid Hormone (serum)
- Vitamin D (serum)
    - If calcitrol level only is measured, rather than both it and calcidiol, then you're really only measuring calcitrol level without any idea of how much calcidiol you're body is producing
        - Realy want vitamin D level (calcidiol) and activated (calcitrol)
- (Inorganic) phosphate/phosphorus (blood, plasma, serum, etc.)

Find information about the following treatments:

- Calcimimetrics
- Calcium Supplement
- Dialysis
- Parathyroidectomy
- Phosphate Binders
- Renal Transplant
- Vitamin D Replacement Therapy



Bone Stuff
http://www.kdigo.org/ControConf/CKD-MBD%202013/Presentations/CKD-MBD%20and%20Osteoporosis%20-%20S.%20Ott.pdf
http://www.bjrm.co.uk/ShowPDF.aspx?index=0&st=14&nd=17&edit=105&aid=820
I believe that hyperparathyroid bone disease is essentially high turnover or high formation bone disease as the high PTH level increases osteoclast and osteoblast activity
Adynamic usualy results as a consequence of taking medications to treat hyperparathyroid bone disease
- Bone Pain
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)
- Bone Fracture
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)
- Bone Deformation
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)
- Joint Pain
    - Caused by some aspect of Renal Osteodystrophy (or many aspects)


Likely Or Proven Correlates:

- Alport Syndrome
- Diabetes
    - Causes CKD
- Hypertension
    - Causes CKD
- Haemolytic Uraemic Syndrome
- Nephrosclerosis
    - Hypertensive Nephrosclerosis
- Nephrosis/Nephrotic Syndrome
    - This may be a consequence of CKD or some of its correlates, but it seems unlikely to be a cause
    - http://www.pathophys.org/nephrotic/
- Anemia
    - CKD causes this
    - https://www.kidneyresearchuk.org/health-information/anaemia-and-kidney-disease
- Infective, obstructive and reflux nephropathies
- Arteriopathic renal disease
- Multisystem diseases with potential kidney involvement
    - systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
- Neoplasms.
- Myeloma.
- Family history of stage 5 CKD or hereditary kidney disease
    - polycystic kidneys.
- Pericarditis
    - CKD causes this
- Cardiovascular Disease
    - CKD causes this
    - Heart attack, stroke or Cerebrovascular Accident, (congestive) heart failure, ischemic heart disease, COPD (is this CVD?), Peripheral Arterial Disease, Peripheral vascular diseases, Transient Ischaemic Attack, coronary heart disease ("Coronary Artery Disease", "Ischemic Heart Disease"), etc. etc.
    - Risk factors for CVD like: smoking status; lipid management; proteinuria; anaemia; glycated haemoglobin and microalbuminuria in people with diabetes; serum cholesterol and total cholesterol: HDL ratio; BMI, alcohol consumption; urinalysis and total protein creatinine ratio; haemoglobin concentration




Other Correlates - No literature checks have been performed to see how these hold up as real causes

- inflammation
- Diabetic Retinopathy
- Hematuria
- Hyperglycemia
- Hyperkalemia
- Iron Deficiency
- Folate (B12) Deficiency
- Impaired Glucose Tolerance
- Relative Erythropoietin Deficiency
- Rheumatoid Arthritis
- Protein in the urine
    - Proteinuria, Microalbuminuria, etc.
- Angina - chest pain due to restricted blood flow
- Balkan (endemic) Nephropathy (ReadV2 K0B6.)
- Infections (CKD as risk multiplier for infectious diseases leading to greater prevalence)
    - Pneumonia
    - Sepsis
    - Pulmonary infections
- Dehydration
- Cancer
    - Kidney cancers…
- Tubular atrophy
- renal papillary necrosis

Treatments

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
    - ACE inhibitors cause relaxation of blood vessels, as well as a decreased blood volume, which leads to lower blood pressure and decreased oxygen demand from the heart. They inhibit the angiotensin-converting enzyme, an important component of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system.
    - Treats
        - Hypertension - Ref: CKD Medscape CME Expert Column Series: Issue 3 — Management of Chronic Kidney Disease Comorbidities)
        - Congestive Heart Failure
- Anti-hypertensives (some codes in the QICKD concepts “Anti hypertensive Drugs Horich”, “Diuretics Drugs Horich”, “Anti hypertensive Drugs”, “Diuretics Drugs”)
    - Alpha-adrenoceptor blockers
    - Beta-adrenoceptor blockers
    - Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
    - Vasodilators
    - Diuretics
        - Thiazide, loop, potassium sparing, potassium sparing compound
        - http://www.pathophys.org/diuretics/
- drugs/therapy that affect renal function (e.g. NSAIDs)
- Calcium channel blocker
- Erythropoietin Stimulating Agents
- Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
    - Aspirin
- Insulin
- Lipid lowering drugs
- T2DM - Meglitinides (glinides), thiazolidinediones (glitazones), sulphonylureas (sulfonylureas), Metformin, Alpha Glucosidase Inhibitors, Amylin Analogs, Biguanides, DPP-4 Inhibitors, Incretin Mimetics, etc.
- Anticoagulants, antiplatelets, etc.
    - Persantin, Warfarin, Clopidogrel, etc.
- Iron Therapy
- Insulin (Insulin Preparations)

Measurements (for CKD, its causes and probably any effects it has)

- CKD
    - Creatinine (serum, etc.)
        - Can be affected by creatinine generation (muscle mass and diet), tubular secretion and extrarenal removal
    - eGFR and Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
    - Albumin in the urine, urine microalbumin, ACR, (micro)ACR, (micro)albumin excretion rate, serum albumin
        - albuminuria
    - Protein in the urine, PCR, urine protein excretion, serum total protein
        - Protienuria
- Other
    - Blood Pressure
    - Glucose (blood, serum, fasting, level, etc.)
    - Haemoglobin (estimated, A1, A1c, level, etc.)
        - The A1 measures are probably HbA1c
    - Fructosamine (serum, etc.)
    - Cholesterol (blood, serum, fasting, total, etc.)
    - Triglycerides (serum, etc.)
    - Aldosterone
    - Folate (B12)
    - Bicarbonate (serum, etc.)
    - C reactive Protein (serum, etc.)
    - Framingham QRISK cardiovascular
    - Uric Acid

Personal, Demographic and Socioeconomic

- Age
- Height
- weight and BMI (obesity)
- alcohol consumption
- Smoking status
- Exercise level
- Ethnicity
- Deprivation index ??
- etc.


# References To Check

infectious diseases continue to be prevalent in low-income countries, secondary to poor sanitation, inadequate supply of safe water, and high concentrations of disease-transmitting vectors (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1548559510000388)

Environmental pollution, pesticides, analgesic abuse, herbal medications, and use of unregulated food additives also contribute to the burden of chronic kidney disease in developing countries (End-Stage Renal Care in Developing Countries: The India Experience)

Genetic factors also contribute. Variations in MYH9 and APOL1 are associated with non-diabetic chronic kidney disease in individuals of African origin (MYH9 is associated with nondiabetic end-stage renal disease in African Americans) (Genetic variation in APOL1 associates with younger age at hemodialysis initiation)
