Notes/Conditions/CKD.md, before:

# Alternate Names

Chronic Kidney Failure
Chronic Renal Disease
Chronic Renal Failure
Chronic Renal Insufficiency

# Definition

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a general term for a range of heterogeneous disorders affecting the structure and function of the kidney CKD manifests as a progressive loss of renal function over time, and is defined as "abnormalities of kidney structure or function, present for at least 3 months, with implications for health" [ref][KDIGO2012]. Classification of CKD is based on cause, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and albuminuria category (i.e. the severity of kidney damage) [ref][KDIGO2012]. Categories of GFR are:

- G1 - Normal or high - GFR >= 90 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G2 - Mildly decreased - GFR in the range 60-89 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G3a - Mild to moderately decreased - GFR in the range 45-59 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G3b - Moderately to severely decreased - GFR in the range 30-44 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G4 - Severely decreased - GFR in the range 15-29 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G5 - Kidney failure - GFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2

Categories for albuminuria are:

- A1 - Normal to mildly increased - albumin-to-creatinine ratio < 30 mg/g (3 mg/mmol)
- A2 - Moderately increased - albumin-to-creatinine ratio in the range 30-300 mg/g (3-30 mg/mmol)
- A3 - Severely increased - albumin-to-creatinine ratio > 300 mg/g (30 mg/mmol)

Risk can then be classified as one of four categories:

- Green - low risk (and if no other markers of kidney disease then no CKD) - G1+A1 or G2+A1
- Yellow - moderately increased risk - G3a+A1, G1+A2 or G2+A2
- Orange - high risk - G3b+A1, G3a+A2, G1+A3 or G2+A3
- Red - very high risk - all other combinations

# Progression

While the rate varies substantially between patients, CKD is characterised by a progressive deterioration in renal function, as evidenced by a decreasing GFR. Despite the wide range of pathological processes that contribute to renal injury, they converge on a common pathway by which they cause progressive renal destruction, characterised morphologically and pathophysiologically by (myo)fibroblast and/or macrophage infiltration, progressive interstitial fibrosis, tubular hypoxia caused by peritubular capillary loss and a decline in functioning nephrons due to tubular atrophy ([ref][EddyProgression] and [ref][YuProgression]). Numerous secondary factors unrelated to the initial disease, such as glomerular hemodynamics, proteinuria and hypertension, have been shown to mediate the rate of CKD progression ([ref][YuProgression]).

In the face of renal injury, the kidney has an innate ability to maintain GFR in spite of the progressive destruction of nephrons, as the remaining healthy nephrons begin to exhibit hyperfiltration and compensatory hypertrophy. The loss of nephrons (irrespective of etiology) therefore initiates haemodynamic factors that perpetuate renal dysfunction [ref][MetcalfeProgression]. The compensatory response in the remaining healthy nephrons can lead to increased intraglomerular pressure, glomerular hypertrophy, hyperfiltration and secondary glomerulosclerosis [ref][MetcalfeProgression]. The glomerulosclerotic injury is often transmitted to the interstitium, leading to tubulo-interstitial injury and apoptotic self-destruction of nephrons [ref][AbbateProgression]. While this path may not be strictly followed in all cases, some component of glomerular or tubulo-interstital injury is frequently seen in patients with CKD, regardless of the original renal injury.

# Causes and Consequences

The causes and consequences of CKD often stem from the primary functions of the kidneys, some of which are:

- Waste product excretion - The kidneys filter out waste products, e.g. toxins, excess salts and urea, from the bloodstream for removal in the urine.
- Balancing of salts - The actions of the kidneys keeps the homeostatic balance of various salts, e.g. sodium, potassium, calcium and phosphate, in the bloodstream.
- Blood pressure regulation - Kidneys need constant pressure to filter the blood. When the pressure drops too low, kidneys help to increase the pressure by producing angiotensin (a blood vessel-constricting peptide hormone) that also stimulates the release of aldosterone, which promotes the retention of sodium, and therefore water, and secretion of potassium in the distal tubules and collecting ducts.
- Water retention regulation - As water intake increases/decreases the kidneys respond accordingly by decreasing/increasing the reabsorption of water and consequently increasing/decreasing the volume of urine produced.
- Activation of vitamin D - The kidneys are involved at the end of the activation pathway for vitamin D by converting calcidiol into calcitriol.
- Regulation of red blood cell production - Erythropoietin is a glycoprotein hormone that controls erythropoiesis (red blood cell production), and is produced by interstitial fibroblasts in the kidney in close association with peritubular capillary and proximal convoluted tubule. When the kidney's don't get enough oxygen, they produce EPO in order to stimulate the production of red blood cells by the bone marrow.
- Acid-base homeostasis - The kidneys help to maintain the pH balance of the blood by reabsorbing bicarbonate from the urine and excreting hydrogen ions into it. Acidosis causes more bicarbonate to be reabsorbed from tubular fluid, while collecting ducts secrete more hydrogen to generate more bicarbonate. Alkalosis causes the kidney to excrete more bicarbonate as there is reduced secretion of hydrogen ions and more ammonium is excreted.

Given the range of injuries that can lead or contribute to CKD, the causes, symptoms and comorbidities of CKD are extensive and dependent on the breadth of contributory factors of interest. While CKD is chronic, acute factors can contribute to the disease by initiating or exacerbating renal injury. Added to this, early stages of the disease are often asymptomatic and detected during assessment of comorbid disorders [ref][LeveyCKD].

- Causes
    - Causes are divided into extra- and intra-renal, conditions originating outside and within the kidney respectively. Intra-renal causes may arise by themselves and/or be the mechanism through which an extra-renal cause induces renal injury. Extra-renal causes all operate through at least one intra-renal mechanism. The causes can be either chronic or acute, provided that the acute causes produce irreversible damage to the kidney and/or can contribute to developing CKD. Causes may occur in more than one category if their effect warrants it (e.g. congenital defects and cancer).
    - Extra-renal
        - Diabetes
            - http://www.pathophys.org/ckd/
            - http://www.kidneypathology.com/English_version/Diabetes_and_others.html
            - Metformin + Iodine
            - ...
        - Hypertension (Systemic)
            - http://www.pathophys.org/ckd/
            - Hypertensive Nephropathy
            - Systemic hypertension can be transmitted causing glomerular capillary hypertension and a subsequent accelerated decline in GFR due to glomerular haemodynamic changes (e.g. compensatory hyperfiltration) [ref][MetcalfeProgression] and [ref][YuProgression].
            - ...
        - Kidney Stones (Renal Lithiasis, Nephrolithiasis, Renal Calculi)
        - Sepsis
    - Intra-renal (Intrinsic)
        - Glomerular Diseases
        - Tubulo-interstitial Diseases
        - Renovascular Diseases
- Consequences
    - Acute Kidney Injury
        - http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/20/6/1199.full#sec-3
        - CKD makes you more susceptible to AKI???
        - ...
    - Anemia
    - CKD-MBD
    - Hypertension
        - Systemic hypertension is common in CKD, and incidence increases with declining GFR [ref][BuckalewHyperGFR]. The activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and the retention of sodium and water can all cause hypertension [ref][MetcalfeProgression] and [ref][YuProgression].
    - Proteinuria

# Diagnosis and Treatment

- Diagnostics
- Treatments

# References

[KDIGO2012]: http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/CKD/KDIGO_2012_CKD_GL.pdf "KDIGO Guidelines 2012"
[LeveyCKD]: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673611601785 "Chronic kidney disease"
[EddyProgression]: https://www.scribd.com/doc/306939098/8-Progression-in-Chronic-Kidney-Disease  "Progression in Chronic Kidney Disease"
[MetcalfeProgression]: http://ndt.oxfordjournals.org/content/22/suppl_9/ix26.full  "How does early chronic kidney disease progress?"
[YuProgression]: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=215760  "Progression of Chronic Renal Failure"
[AbbateProgression]: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/17/11/2974.full "How Does Proteinuria Cause Progressive Renal Damage?"
[RusterProteinuria]: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/17/11/2985.full#sec-5 "Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System and Progression of Renal Disease"
[BuckalewHyperGFR]: http://www.ajkd.org/article/S0272-6386(96)90380-7/abstract "Prevalence of hypertension in 1,795 subjects with chronic renal disease: The modification of diet in renal disease study baseline cohort"

# Relationships

### Conditions
- CKD
- CKD-MBD

### Diagnostics

### Treatments

### Edges
- CKD-MBD -[:CausedBy]-> CKD

Commit message:

Added infections to CKD consequences

Notes/Conditions/CKD.md, after:

# Alternate Names

Chronic Kidney Failure
Chronic Renal Disease
Chronic Renal Failure
Chronic Renal Insufficiency

# Definition

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a general term for a range of heterogeneous disorders affecting the structure and function of the kidney CKD manifests as a progressive loss of renal function over time, and is defined as "abnormalities of kidney structure or function, present for at least 3 months, with implications for health" [ref][KDIGO2012]. Classification of CKD is based on cause, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and albuminuria category (i.e. the severity of kidney damage) [ref][KDIGO2012]. Categories of GFR are:

- G1 - Normal or high - GFR >= 90 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G2 - Mildly decreased - GFR in the range 60-89 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G3a - Mild to moderately decreased - GFR in the range 45-59 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G3b - Moderately to severely decreased - GFR in the range 30-44 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G4 - Severely decreased - GFR in the range 15-29 mL/min/1.73 m2
- G5 - Kidney failure - GFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2

Categories for albuminuria are:

- A1 - Normal to mildly increased - albumin-to-creatinine ratio < 30 mg/g (3 mg/mmol)
- A2 - Moderately increased - albumin-to-creatinine ratio in the range 30-300 mg/g (3-30 mg/mmol)
- A3 - Severely increased - albumin-to-creatinine ratio > 300 mg/g (30 mg/mmol)

Risk can then be classified as one of four categories:

- Green - low risk (and if no other markers of kidney disease then no CKD) - G1+A1 or G2+A1
- Yellow - moderately increased risk - G3a+A1, G1+A2 or G2+A2
- Orange - high risk - G3b+A1, G3a+A2, G1+A3 or G2+A3
- Red - very high risk - all other combinations

# Progression

While the rate varies substantially between patients, CKD is characterised by a progressive deterioration in renal function, as evidenced by a decreasing GFR. Despite the wide range of pathological processes that contribute to renal injury, they converge on a common pathway by which they cause progressive renal destruction, characterised morphologically and pathophysiologically by (myo)fibroblast and/or macrophage infiltration, progressive interstitial fibrosis, tubular hypoxia caused by peritubular capillary loss and a decline in functioning nephrons due to tubular atrophy ([ref][EddyProgression] and [ref][YuProgression]). Numerous secondary factors unrelated to the initial disease, such as glomerular hemodynamics, proteinuria and hypertension, have been shown to mediate the rate of CKD progression ([ref][YuProgression]).

In the face of renal injury, the kidney has an innate ability to maintain GFR in spite of the progressive destruction of nephrons, as the remaining healthy nephrons begin to exhibit hyperfiltration and compensatory hypertrophy. The loss of nephrons (irrespective of etiology) therefore initiates haemodynamic factors that perpetuate renal dysfunction [ref][MetcalfeProgression]. The compensatory response in the remaining healthy nephrons can lead to increased intraglomerular pressure, glomerular hypertrophy, hyperfiltration and secondary glomerulosclerosis [ref][MetcalfeProgression]. The glomerulosclerotic injury is often transmitted to the interstitium, leading to tubulo-interstitial injury and apoptotic self-destruction of nephrons [ref][AbbateProgression]. While this path may not be strictly followed in all cases, some component of glomerular or tubulo-interstital injury is frequently seen in patients with CKD, regardless of the original renal injury.

# Causes and Consequences

The causes and consequences of CKD often stem from the primary functions of the kidneys, some of which are:

- Waste product excretion - The kidneys filter out waste products, e.g. toxins, excess salts and urea, from the bloodstream for removal in the urine.
- Balancing of salts - The actions of the kidneys keeps the homeostatic balance of various salts, e.g. sodium, potassium, calcium and phosphate, in the bloodstream.
- Blood pressure regulation - Kidneys need constant pressure to filter the blood. When the pressure drops too low, kidneys help to increase the pressure by producing angiotensin (a blood vessel-constricting peptide hormone) that also stimulates the release of aldosterone, which promotes the retention of sodium, and therefore water, and secretion of potassium in the distal tubules and collecting ducts.
- Water retention regulation - As water intake increases/decreases the kidneys respond accordingly by decreasing/increasing the reabsorption of water and consequently increasing/decreasing the volume of urine produced.
- Activation of vitamin D - The kidneys are involved at the end of the activation pathway for vitamin D by converting calcidiol into calcitriol.
- Regulation of red blood cell production - Erythropoietin is a glycoprotein hormone that controls erythropoiesis (red blood cell production), and is produced by interstitial fibroblasts in the kidney in close association with peritubular capillary and proximal convoluted tubule. When the kidney's don't get enough oxygen, they produce EPO in order to stimulate the production of red blood cells by the bone marrow.
- Acid-base homeostasis - The kidneys help to maintain the pH balance of the blood by reabsorbing bicarbonate from the urine and excreting hydrogen ions into it. Acidosis causes more bicarbonate to be reabsorbed from tubular fluid, while collecting ducts secrete more hydrogen to generate more bicarbonate. Alkalosis causes the kidney to excrete more bicarbonate as there is reduced secretion of hydrogen ions and more ammonium is excreted.

Given the range of injuries that can lead or contribute to CKD, the causes, symptoms and comorbidities of CKD are extensive and dependent on the breadth of contributory factors of interest. While CKD is chronic, acute factors can contribute to the disease by initiating or exacerbating renal injury. Added to this, early stages of the disease are often asymptomatic and detected during assessment of comorbid disorders [ref][LeveyCKD].

- Causes
    - Causes are divided into extra- and intra-renal, conditions originating outside and within the kidney respectively. Intra-renal causes may arise by themselves and/or be the mechanism through which an extra-renal cause induces renal injury. Extra-renal causes all operate through at least one intra-renal mechanism. The causes can be either chronic or acute, provided that the acute causes produce irreversible damage to the kidney and/or can contribute to developing CKD. Causes may occur in more than one category if their effect warrants it (e.g. congenital defects and cancer).
    - Extra-renal
        - Kidney Stones (Renal Lithiasis, Nephrolithiasis, Renal Calculi)
    - Intra-renal (Intrinsic)
        - Glomerular Diseases
        - Tubulo-interstitial Diseases
        - Renovascular Diseases
- Consequences
    - Anemia
    - CKD-MBD
    - Hypertension
        - Systemic hypertension is common in CKD, and incidence increases with declining GFR [ref][BuckalewHyperGFR]. The activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and the retention of sodium and water can all cause hypertension [ref][MetcalfeProgression] and [ref][YuProgression].
    - Proteinuria
    - Infections
        - Patients with CKD are more susceptible to infections in general, especially stage 5 CKD and dialysis patients [ref][DalrympleInfection] and [ref][NaqviSepsis].
        - Pneumonia
            - Greater incidence in CKD patients who have not started dialysis than in non-CKD patients [ref][NaqviSepsis].
        - Sepsis
            - Patients with CKD are More likely to suffer sepsis/septic shock and when they do it's more likely to result in morbidity and mortality [ref][MaizelSepsis] and [ref][NaqviSepsis]. This is likely due to the large range of comorbidities suffered by patients with CKD, especially uremia [ref][NaqviSepsis].
        - UTI
            - Greater incidence in CKD patients who have not started dialysis than in non-CKD patients [ref][NaqviSepsis]. This may be explained in part by a greater incidence of urinary obstructions, which in turn leads to infections [ref][NaqviSepsis].

# Diagnosis and Treatment

- Diagnostics
- Treatments

# References

[KDIGO2012]: http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/pdf/CKD/KDIGO_2012_CKD_GL.pdf "KDIGO Guidelines 2012"
[LeveyCKD]: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673611601785 "Chronic kidney disease"
[EddyProgression]: https://www.scribd.com/doc/306939098/8-Progression-in-Chronic-Kidney-Disease  "Progression in Chronic Kidney Disease"
[MetcalfeProgression]: http://ndt.oxfordjournals.org/content/22/suppl_9/ix26.full  "How does early chronic kidney disease progress?"
[YuProgression]: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=215760  "Progression of Chronic Renal Failure"
[AbbateProgression]: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/17/11/2974.full "How Does Proteinuria Cause Progressive Renal Damage?"
[RusterProteinuria]: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/17/11/2985.full#sec-5 "Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System and Progression of Renal Disease"
[BuckalewHyperGFR]: http://www.ajkd.org/article/S0272-6386(96)90380-7/abstract "Prevalence of hypertension in 1,795 subjects with chronic renal disease: The modification of diet in renal disease study baseline cohort"
[NaqviSepsis]: http://home.smh.com/sections/services-procedures/medlib/pandemic/pan_renal/panrenal_naqvi_050809.pdf "Infectious Complications in Chronic Kidney Disease"
[DalrympleInfection]: http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/content/3/5/1487.full#sec-23 "Epidemiology of Acute Infections among Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease"
[MaizelSepsis]: https://bmcnephrol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2369-14-77 "Impact of non-dialysis chronic kidney disease on survival in patients with septic shock"

# Relationships

### Conditions
- CKD
- CKD-MBD

### Diagnostics

### Treatments

### Edges
- CKD-MBD -[:CausedBy]-> CKD
