Notes/Conditions/GlomerularDiseases.md, before:

# Names

# Definition

Glomerular integrity and function can be affected by a number of inflammatory (often referred to as glomerulonephritis) and non-inflammatory diseases. The glomerulus comprises a series of capillary loops that derive from the afferent arteriole and drain into the efferent arteriole. Of the variety of cells that make up the glomerulus, two that are particularly important in glomerular diseases are:

- Glomerular Endothelial Cells
    - Glomerular endothelial cells (unlabelled in the renal corpuscle image, sitting on the interior of the capillaries across the basement membrane from the podocytes) line the interior of the capillaries that make up the glomerulus, and allow for the free filtration of fluid and plasma solutes.
- Podocytes (or Visceral Epithelial Cells)
    - Podocytes (3a and 3b in the image of the renal corpuscle) wrap around the capillaries of the glomerulus and interdigitate, leaving gaps that restrict the passage of macromolecules (such as albumin) but allow small molecules such as water, glucose, and ionic salts to pass through.

Glomerular diseases can be caused by a variety of mechanisms, including immune mediated, hemodynamic (e.g. hypertension, reduced renal mass), metabolic (e.g. diabetes, metabolic syndrome) and hereditary (e.g. defects of the glomerular basement membrane in Alport syndrome). The most common cause of glomerulonephritis is immune-mediated injury. Causes of glomerular diseases can also be divided into primary and secondary depending on whether the cause is a primary renal disease (i.e. the disease arose in the kidneys) or glomerular involvement is secondary to a systemic disease.

To simplify the divisions between the causes, consequences and diagnostics of glomerular diseases, they can be classified as belonging to one of two main groups: nephrotic or nephritic. However, this classification is slightly artificial as a patient can present with features of both the nephrotic and nephritic syndromes. Although patients may present with one (or both) of these syndromes, they may be secondary to an underlying multisystem cause (e.g. diabetic nephropathy). It is also possible for patients to present with, for example, hematuria only or low-grade proteinuria before they develop full-blown nephrotic or nephritic syndrome.

# Causes and Consequences

- Causes
    - Mixed Nephrotic and Nephritic Syndromes
        - Primary
            - IgA Nephropathy
            - Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis
            - Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis
        - Secondary
            - Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (Lupus Nephritis)
    - Nephrotic Syndrome
        - [ref][KodnerNephrotic]
        - Primary
            - Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
                - FSGS is the most common single form of nephrotic syndrome in adults.
            - Membranous Glomerulonephritis (Membranous Nephropathy)
            - Mesangial Proliferative Glomerulonephritis (Mesangiocapillary Glomerulonephritis)
            - Minimal Change Disease
                - MCD is the most common single form of nephrotic syndrome in children.
        - Secondary
            - Amyloidosis
            - Diabetic Nephropathy
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Primary
            - Antiglomerular Basement Membrane Disease (Goodpasture's Disease)
            - Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis
            - Thin Basement Membrane Disease
        - Secondary
            - Vasculitis
- Consequences
    - Shared
        - Edema
            - Edema is believed to result from (potentially) two mechanisms: the overfill and underfill hypotheses [ref][HumphreysNephroticEdema].
            - Overfill
                - This occurs as the renal disease induces primary sodium retention (decrease in sodium excretion). This in turn results in an increase in water retention. Edema eventually develops based on the 'overflowing' of the retained water.
            - Underfill
                - This occurs due to secondary sodium retention. The low plasma oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia promotes the movement of fluid from the vascular space into the interstitium. This results in hypovolemia and the activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. This leads to the secondary retention of sodium and water. This is believed to be the case in a minority of patients [ref][PalmerNephroticEdema].
        - Hypertension
            - Activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system increases antidiuretic hormone levels and leads to the subsequent retention of sodium and water (and consequently systemic hypertension).
        - Hypervolemia
            - Increased water retention lead to hypervolemia.
        - Hyponatremia
            - Hyponatremia is seen due to the retained sodium being diluted due to the greater retention of water.
    - Nephrotic Syndrome
        - Glomerular injury caused by non-inflammatory damage can lead to the nephrotic syndrome. Changes in GFR are generally not seen until later in the course of the disease.
        - Anasarca
            - Edema can develop into anasarca (generalised edema) in more sever cases.
        - Ascites
            - Water retention can lead to ascites in more sever cases.
        - Hyperlipidemia (Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertriglyceridemia)
            - Hypoproteinemia stimulates a compensatory mechanism of protein synthesis in the liver, which includes the synthesis of lipoproteins.
            - Lipid catabolism is decreased due to lower levels of lipoprotein lipase, the main enzyme involved in lipoprotein breakdown.
        - (Hyper)lipiduria
            - Lipiduria is a result of the increased level of proteins in the urine, including lipoproteins [ref][NosratolaHyperlipid].
        - Hypoproteinemia (including Hypoalbuminemia)
            - The loss of protein into the urine exceeds the hepatic clearance level, meaning that protein synthesis in the liver is insufficient to compensate for the loss of protein, resulting in a low level of protein in the blood.
        - (Massive) Proteinuria
            - Damage to the endothelial surface, the glomerular basement membrane or the podocytes can alter the ability of the glomerulus to prevent the movement of large macromolecules, and allows proteins such as albumin, antithrombin and immunoglobulins to pass out of the blood. As the tubules are not designed to allow the reabsorption of large molecules, protein that leaves via the glomerulus is not reabsorbed, and consequently appears in the urine.
        - Pleural Effusion
            - In some cases the water retention can result in pleural effusion.
        - Thrombophilia (Hypercoagulability)
            - The nephrotic syndrome can put patients at greater risk of thromboembolic events, primarily due to the hypoalbuminemia [ref][GiganteHypercoag]. It also results from urinary loss of the anticoagulant antithrombin in the urine and increased synthesis of procoagulatory factors by the liver.
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Glomerular injury caused by inflammatory damage can lead to the nephritic syndrome. This is generally characterised by a decrease in GFR early on. Inflammatory damage to cells lining the glomerulus (the basement membrane and podocytes) also leads to pores large enough to proteins and red blood cells to pass into the urine. These changes can affect some (segmental) or all (global) of the glomerulus, and can affect some (focal) or all (diffuse) of the glomeruli within the kidneys.
        - Azotemia
            - As there is decreased filtering of the blood, levels of waste products rise resulting in azotemia (and potentially uremia).
        - Edema
            - The decrease in glomerular filtration in the nephritic syndrome causes marked salt and water retention, leading to edema.
        - Elevated Creatinine Level
            - Reduced GFR leads to an accumulation of creatinine in the blood.
        - Hematuria
            - Alterations to the filtration capabilities of the glomerulus enable red blood cells to enter the urine.
        - Hyperkalemia
            - Hyperkalemia may result from an impaired ability to excrete potassium.
        - Hypertension
            - In addition to hypertension caused via the retention of water and sodium seen in the nephrotic syndrome, the reduction in GFR associated with the nephritic syndrome leads to additional retention and hypertension. Glomerular haemodynamics in response to the decrease in GFR, such as compensatory ultrafiltration, can also contribute to the increase in hypertension.
        - Metabolic Acidosis
            - The decreased GFR can cause metabolic acidosis due to the impaired acid excretion. 
        - Oliguria
            - As there is decreased filtering of the blood, the production of urine falls.
        - Proteinuria
            - To a lesser extent than patients with the nephrotic syndrome.

# Diagnosis and Treatment

- Diagnostics
    - Shared
        - Bloodwork
            - Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
            - Creatinine
                - Rule out acute renal failure, assess glomerular filtration rate
        - Renal Biopsy
        - Urinalysis
            - Protein:Creatinine Ratio (PCR)
                - Quantify degree of proteinuria (ratio greater than 3 to 3.5)
            - Urine Protein
                - Confirm proteinuria
    - Nephrotic Syndrome [ref][KodnerNephrotic]
        - Bloodwork
            - Albumin
                - Assess degree of hypoalbuminemia
            - Lipid Panel (Lipid Profile)
                - Assess degree of hyperlipidemia
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Bloodwork
            - Potassium Level
        - Urinalysis
            - Red Blood Cell Casts
            - Urine Volume
- Treatments [ref][KodnerNephrotic]
    - Treatment for the underlying cause.
    - In all cases treatment choices need to be informed by the underlying condition in order to not exacerbate it.
    - Shared
        - ACE Inhibitors
            - To treat the fluid retention, hypertension and proteinuria.
        - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
            - To treat the fluid retention, hypertension and proteinuria.
        - Anticoagulant
            - To treat the thrombophilia/hypercoagulability.
        - Diuretics
            - Used to treat edema and hypertension.
            - Loop Diuretics
                - Used to treat the edema. In hypoalbuminemic these may not work as loop diuretics are inactivated by binding to albumin in the tubular lumen. As proteinuria is associated with increased tubular uptake of protein, which is then catabolised, albumin is present in the tubules to inactivate the diuretic.
        - Statins
            - To treat the hyperlipidemia.
    - Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Treatment for the infection...

# References

[HumphreysNephroticEdema]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2376618/ "Underfill and overflow revisited: mechanisms of nephrotic edema"
[PalmerNephroticEdema]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9185099 "Pathogenesis of edema formation in the nephrotic syndrome"
[GiganteHypercoag]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22724465 "Hypercoagulability and nephrotic syndrome"
[NosratolaHyperlipid]: http://www.kidney-international.org/article/S0085-2538(16)30004-7/fulltext "Disorders of lipid metabolism in nephrotic syndrome: mechanisms and consequences"
[KodnerNephrotic]: http://www.aafp.org/afp/2009/1115/p1129.html "Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults: Diagnosis and Management"

http://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/genitourinary-disorders/glomerular-disorders/overview-of-glomerular-disorders
https://www.fastbleep.com/medical-notes/gi-and-renal/12/134

# Relationships

### Conditions
- Amyloidosis
- Anasarca
- Antiglomerular Basement Membrane Disease (Goodpasture's Disease)
- Ascites
- Azotemia
- Diabetic Nephropathy
- Edema
- Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
- Glomerular Disease
- Hematuria
- Hypercoagulability
- Hyperkalemia
- Hyperlipidemia (Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertriglyceridemia)
- (Hyper)lipiduria
- Hypertension
- Hypervolemia
- Hypoalbuminemia
- Hyponatremia
- Hypoproteinemia
- IgA Nephropathy
- Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis
- Membranous Glomerulonephritis (Membranous Nephropathy)
- Mesangial Proliferative Glomerulonephritis (Mesangiocapillary Glomerulonephritis)
- Metabolic Acidosis
- Minimal Change Disease
- Nephritic Syndrome
- Nephrotic Syndrome
- Oliguria
- Pleural Effusion
- Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis
- Proteinuria
- Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis
- Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (Lupus Nephritis)
- Thin Basement Membrane Disease
- Thrombophilia
- Uremia
- Vasculitis

### Diagnostics
- Albumin
- Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
- Creatinine
- Lipid Panel (Lipid Profile)
- Protein:Creatinine Ratio (PCR)
- Red Blood Cell Casts
- Renal Biopsy
- Urine Protein

### Treatments
- ACE Inhibitors
- Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
- Diuretics
- Statins

### Edges
- Top Level Relationships
    - Nephritic Syndrome -[:TypeOf]-> Glomerular Disease
    - Nephrotic Syndrome -[:TypeOf]-> Glomerular Disease
- Primary Conditions
    - Amyloidosis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Antiglomerular Basement Membrane Disease (Goodpasture's Disease) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Diabetic Nephropathy -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - IgA Nephropathy -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - IgA Nephropathy -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Membranous Glomerulonephritis (Membranous Nephropathy) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Mesangial Proliferative Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Minimal Change Disease -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Systemic Lupus Erythematosus -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Systemic Lupus Erythematosus -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Thin Basement Membrane Disease -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Vasculitis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
- Nephritic Syndrome Relationships
    - Azotemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Edema -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Elevated Creatinine Level -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hematuria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hyperkalemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hypertension -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hypervolemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hyponatremia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Metabolic Acidosis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Oliguria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Proteinuria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
- Nephrotic Syndrome Relationships
    - Anasarca -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Ascites -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Edema -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hyperlipidemia (Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertriglyceridemia) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - (Hyper)lipiduria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypertension -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypervolemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hyponatremia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypoproteinemia (including Hypoalbuminemia) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - (Massive) Proteinuria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Pleural Effusion -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Thrombophilia (Hypercoagulability) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
- Diagnostic Relationships
    - Albumin -[:DecreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Blood Urea Nitrogen -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Blood Urea Nitrogen -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Creatinine -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Creatinine -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Lipid Panel -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Potassium Level -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Protein:Creatinine Ratio -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Protein:Creatinine Ratio -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Red Blood Cell Casts -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Renal Biopsy -[:Diagnoses]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Renal Biopsy -[:Diagnoses]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Urine Protein -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Urine Protein -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Urine Volume -[:DecreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
- Treatment Relationships
    - ACE Inhibitors -[:Treats]-> Edema
    - ACE Inhibitors -[:Treats]-> Hypertension
    - ACE Inhibitors -[:Treats]-> Proteinuria
    - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers -[:Treats]-> Edema
    - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers -[:Treats]-> Hypertension
    - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers -[:Treats]-> Proteinuria
    - Anticoagulant -[:Treats]-> Thrombophilia
    - Anticoagulant -[:Treats]-> Hypercoagulability
    - Diuretics -[:Treats]-> Edema
    - Diuretics -[:Treats]-> Hypertension
    - Statins -[:Treats]-> Hyperlipidemia

Commit message:

Added some additional causes and consequences

Notes/Conditions/GlomerularDiseases.md, after:

# Names

# Definition

Glomerular integrity and function can be affected by a number of inflammatory (often referred to as glomerulonephritis) and non-inflammatory diseases. The glomerulus comprises a series of capillary loops that derive from the afferent arteriole and drain into the efferent arteriole. Of the variety of cells that make up the glomerulus, two that are particularly important in glomerular diseases are:

- Glomerular Endothelial Cells
    - Glomerular endothelial cells (unlabelled in the renal corpuscle image, sitting on the interior of the capillaries across the basement membrane from the podocytes) line the interior of the capillaries that make up the glomerulus, and allow for the free filtration of fluid and plasma solutes.
- Podocytes (or Visceral Epithelial Cells)
    - Podocytes (3a and 3b in the image of the renal corpuscle) wrap around the capillaries of the glomerulus and interdigitate, leaving gaps that restrict the passage of macromolecules (such as albumin) but allow small molecules such as water, glucose, and ionic salts to pass through.

Glomerular diseases can be caused by a variety of mechanisms, including immune mediated, hemodynamic (e.g. hypertension, reduced renal mass), metabolic (e.g. diabetes, metabolic syndrome) and hereditary (e.g. defects of the glomerular basement membrane in Alport syndrome). The most common cause of glomerulonephritis is immune-mediated injury. Causes of glomerular diseases can also be divided into primary and secondary depending on whether the cause is a primary renal disease (i.e. the disease arose in the kidneys) or glomerular involvement is secondary to a systemic disease.

To simplify the divisions between the causes, consequences and diagnostics of glomerular diseases, they can be classified as belonging to one of two main groups: nephrotic or nephritic. However, this classification is slightly artificial as a patient can present with features of both the nephrotic and nephritic syndromes. Although patients may present with one (or both) of these syndromes, they may be secondary to an underlying multisystem cause (e.g. diabetic nephropathy). It is also possible for patients to present with, for example, hematuria only or low-grade proteinuria before they develop full-blown nephrotic or nephritic syndrome.

# Causes and Consequences

- Causes
    - Mixed Nephrotic and Nephritic Syndromes
        - Primary
            - IgA Nephropathy
            - Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis
            - Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis
        - Secondary
            - Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (Lupus Nephritis)
    - Nephrotic Syndrome
        - [ref][KodnerNephrotic]
        - Primary
            - Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
                - FSGS is the most common single form of nephrotic syndrome in adults.
            - Membranous Glomerulonephritis (Membranous Nephropathy)
            - Mesangial Proliferative Glomerulonephritis (Mesangiocapillary Glomerulonephritis)
            - Minimal Change Disease
                - MCD is the most common single form of nephrotic syndrome in children.
        - Secondary
            - Amyloidosis
            - Diabetic Nephropathy
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Primary
            - Alport Syndrome
            - Antiglomerular Basement Membrane Disease (Goodpasture's Disease)
            - Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis
            - Thin Basement Membrane Disease
        - Secondary
            - Vasculitis
- Consequences
    - Shared
        - Edema
            - Edema is believed to result from (potentially) two mechanisms: the overfill and underfill hypotheses [ref][HumphreysNephroticEdema].
            - Overfill
                - This occurs as the renal disease induces primary sodium retention (decrease in sodium excretion). This in turn results in an increase in water retention. Edema eventually develops based on the 'overflowing' of the retained water.
            - Underfill
                - This occurs due to secondary sodium retention. The low plasma oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia promotes the movement of fluid from the vascular space into the interstitium. This results in hypovolemia and the activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. This leads to the secondary retention of sodium and water. This is believed to be the case in a minority of patients [ref][PalmerNephroticEdema].
        - Hypertension
            - Activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system increases antidiuretic hormone levels and leads to the subsequent retention of sodium and water (and consequently systemic hypertension).
        - Hypervolemia
            - Increased water retention lead to hypervolemia.
        - Hyponatremia
            - Hyponatremia is seen due to the retained sodium being diluted due to the greater retention of water.
    - Nephrotic Syndrome
        - Glomerular injury caused by non-inflammatory damage can lead to the nephrotic syndrome. Changes in GFR are generally not seen until later in the course of the disease.
        - Anasarca
            - Edema can develop into anasarca (generalised edema) in more sever cases.
        - Ascites
            - Water retention can lead to ascites in more sever cases.
        - Hyperlipidemia (Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertriglyceridemia)
            - Hypoproteinemia stimulates a compensatory mechanism of protein synthesis in the liver, which includes the synthesis of lipoproteins.
            - Lipid catabolism is decreased due to lower levels of lipoprotein lipase, the main enzyme involved in lipoprotein breakdown.
        - (Hyper)lipiduria
            - Lipiduria is a result of the increased level of proteins in the urine, including lipoproteins [ref][NosratolaHyperlipid].
        - Hypocalcaemia
            - Results from low albumin and the loss of urinary vitamin D. This causes less calcium to be absorbed.
        - Hypoproteinemia (including Hypoalbuminemia)
            - The loss of protein into the urine exceeds the hepatic clearance level, meaning that protein synthesis in the liver is insufficient to compensate for the loss of protein, resulting in a low level of protein in the blood.
        - (Massive) Proteinuria
            - Damage to the endothelial surface, the glomerular basement membrane or the podocytes can alter the ability of the glomerulus to prevent the movement of large macromolecules, and allows proteins such as albumin, antithrombin and immunoglobulins to pass out of the blood. As the tubules are not designed to allow the reabsorption of large molecules, protein that leaves via the glomerulus is not reabsorbed, and consequently appears in the urine.
        - Pleural Effusion
            - In some cases the water retention can result in pleural effusion.
        - Thrombophilia (Hypercoagulability)
            - The nephrotic syndrome can put patients at greater risk of thromboembolic events, primarily due to the hypoalbuminemia [ref][GiganteHypercoag]. It also results from urinary loss of the anticoagulant antithrombin in the urine and increased synthesis of procoagulatory factors by the liver.
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Glomerular injury caused by inflammatory damage can lead to the nephritic syndrome. This is generally characterised by a decrease in GFR early on. Inflammatory damage to cells lining the glomerulus (the basement membrane and podocytes) also leads to pores large enough to proteins and red blood cells to pass into the urine. These changes can affect some (segmental) or all (global) of the glomerulus, and can affect some (focal) or all (diffuse) of the glomeruli within the kidneys.
        - Azotemia
            - As there is decreased filtering of the blood, levels of waste products rise resulting in azotemia (and potentially uremia).
        - Edema
            - The decrease in glomerular filtration in the nephritic syndrome causes marked salt and water retention, leading to edema.
        - Elevated Creatinine Level
            - Reduced GFR leads to an accumulation of creatinine in the blood.
        - Hematuria
            - Alterations to the filtration capabilities of the glomerulus enable red blood cells to enter the urine.
        - Hyperkalemia
            - Hyperkalemia may result from an impaired ability to excrete potassium.
        - Hypertension
            - In addition to hypertension caused via the retention of water and sodium seen in the nephrotic syndrome, the reduction in GFR associated with the nephritic syndrome leads to additional retention and hypertension. Glomerular haemodynamics in response to the decrease in GFR, such as compensatory ultrafiltration, can also contribute to the increase in hypertension.
        - Metabolic Acidosis
            - The decreased GFR can cause metabolic acidosis due to the impaired acid excretion. 
        - Oliguria
            - As there is decreased filtering of the blood, the production of urine falls.
        - Proteinuria
            - To a lesser extent than patients with the nephrotic syndrome.

# Diagnosis and Treatment

- Diagnostics
    - Shared
        - Bloodwork
            - Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
            - Creatinine
                - Rule out acute renal failure, assess glomerular filtration rate
        - Renal Biopsy
        - Urinalysis
            - Protein:Creatinine Ratio (PCR)
                - Quantify degree of proteinuria (ratio greater than 3 to 3.5)
            - Urine Protein
                - Confirm proteinuria
    - Nephrotic Syndrome [ref][KodnerNephrotic]
        - Bloodwork
            - Albumin
                - Assess degree of hypoalbuminemia
            - Lipid Panel (Lipid Profile)
                - Assess degree of hyperlipidemia
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Bloodwork
            - Potassium Level
        - Urinalysis
            - Red Blood Cell Casts
            - Urine Volume
- Treatments [ref][KodnerNephrotic]
    - Treatment for the underlying cause.
    - In all cases treatment choices need to be informed by the underlying condition in order to not exacerbate it.
    - Shared
        - ACE Inhibitors
            - To treat the fluid retention, hypertension and proteinuria.
        - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
            - To treat the fluid retention, hypertension and proteinuria.
        - Anticoagulant
            - To treat the thrombophilia/hypercoagulability.
        - Diuretics
            - Used to treat edema and hypertension.
            - Loop Diuretics
                - Used to treat the edema. In hypoalbuminemic these may not work as loop diuretics are inactivated by binding to albumin in the tubular lumen. As proteinuria is associated with increased tubular uptake of protein, which is then catabolised, albumin is present in the tubules to inactivate the diuretic.
        - Statins
            - To treat the hyperlipidemia.
    - Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Nephritic Syndrome
        - Treatment for the infection...

# References

[HumphreysNephroticEdema]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2376618/ "Underfill and overflow revisited: mechanisms of nephrotic edema"
[PalmerNephroticEdema]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9185099 "Pathogenesis of edema formation in the nephrotic syndrome"
[GiganteHypercoag]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22724465 "Hypercoagulability and nephrotic syndrome"
[NosratolaHyperlipid]: http://www.kidney-international.org/article/S0085-2538(16)30004-7/fulltext "Disorders of lipid metabolism in nephrotic syndrome: mechanisms and consequences"
[KodnerNephrotic]: http://www.aafp.org/afp/2009/1115/p1129.html "Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults: Diagnosis and Management"

http://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/genitourinary-disorders/glomerular-disorders/overview-of-glomerular-disorders
https://www.fastbleep.com/medical-notes/gi-and-renal/12/134
http://www.kumc.edu/AMA-MSS/Study/nephrotic_and_nephritic_syndromes.htm

# Relationships

### Conditions
- Alport Syndrome
- Amyloidosis
- Anasarca
- Antiglomerular Basement Membrane Disease (Goodpasture's Disease)
- Ascites
- Azotemia
- Diabetic Nephropathy
- Edema
- Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis
- Glomerular Disease
- Hematuria
- Hypercoagulability
- Hyperkalemia
- Hyperlipidemia (Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertriglyceridemia)
- (Hyper)lipiduria
- Hypertension
- Hypervolemia
- Hypoalbuminemia
- Hypocalcaemia
- Hyponatremia
- Hypoproteinemia
- IgA Nephropathy
- Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis
- Membranous Glomerulonephritis (Membranous Nephropathy)
- Mesangial Proliferative Glomerulonephritis (Mesangiocapillary Glomerulonephritis)
- Metabolic Acidosis
- Minimal Change Disease
- Nephritic Syndrome
- Nephrotic Syndrome
- Oliguria
- Pleural Effusion
- Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis
- Proteinuria
- Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis
- Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (Lupus Nephritis)
- Thin Basement Membrane Disease
- Thrombophilia
- Uremia
- Vasculitis

### Diagnostics
- Albumin
- Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
- Creatinine
- Lipid Panel (Lipid Profile)
- Protein:Creatinine Ratio (PCR)
- Red Blood Cell Casts
- Renal Biopsy
- Urine Protein

### Treatments
- ACE Inhibitors
- Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
- Diuretics
- Statins

### Edges
- Top Level Relationships
    - Nephritic Syndrome -[:TypeOf]-> Glomerular Disease
    - Nephrotic Syndrome -[:TypeOf]-> Glomerular Disease
- Primary Conditions
    - Alport Syndrome -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Amyloidosis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Antiglomerular Basement Membrane Disease -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Diabetic Nephropathy -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - IgA Nephropathy -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - IgA Nephropathy -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Membranous Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Mesangial Proliferative Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Minimal Change Disease -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Postinfectious Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Systemic Lupus Erythematosus -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Systemic Lupus Erythematosus -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Thin Basement Membrane Disease -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Vasculitis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
- Nephritic Syndrome Relationships
    - Azotemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Edema -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Elevated Creatinine Level -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hematuria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hyperkalemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hypertension -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hypervolemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Hyponatremia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Metabolic Acidosis -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Oliguria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Proteinuria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephritic Syndrome
- Nephrotic Syndrome Relationships
    - Anasarca -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Ascites -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Edema -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hyperlipidemia (Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertriglyceridemia) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - (Hyper)lipiduria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypertension -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypervolemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypocalcaemia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hyponatremia -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Hypoproteinemia (including Hypoalbuminemia) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - (Massive) Proteinuria -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Pleural Effusion -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Thrombophilia (Hypercoagulability) -[:ContributesTo]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
- Diagnostic Relationships
    - Albumin -[:DecreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Blood Urea Nitrogen -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Blood Urea Nitrogen -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Creatinine -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Creatinine -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Lipid Panel -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Potassium Level -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Protein:Creatinine Ratio -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Protein:Creatinine Ratio -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Red Blood Cell Casts -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Renal Biopsy -[:Diagnoses]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Renal Biopsy -[:Diagnoses]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Urine Protein -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
    - Urine Protein -[:IncreasedBy]-> Nephrotic Syndrome
    - Urine Volume -[:DecreasedBy]-> Nephritic Syndrome
- Treatment Relationships
    - ACE Inhibitors -[:Treats]-> Edema
    - ACE Inhibitors -[:Treats]-> Hypertension
    - ACE Inhibitors -[:Treats]-> Proteinuria
    - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers -[:Treats]-> Edema
    - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers -[:Treats]-> Hypertension
    - Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers -[:Treats]-> Proteinuria
    - Anticoagulant -[:Treats]-> Thrombophilia
    - Anticoagulant -[:Treats]-> Hypercoagulability
    - Diuretics -[:Treats]-> Edema
    - Diuretics -[:Treats]-> Hypertension
    - Statins -[:Treats]-> Hyperlipidemia
